>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR JANUARY 7, 2017: A FLORIDA
AIRPORT REOPENS THE DAY AFTER A
MASS SHOOTING THERE CLAIMED FIVE
LIVES.
WHAT HAPPENS NOW?
FOLLOWING U.S. INTELLIGENCE
ASSESSMENTS ON RUSSIAN INFLUENCE
ON THE PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
WHAT'S REPLACING OBAMACARE?
HOW ONE STATE OFFERS A PREVIEW
OF THE DEBATE TO COME IN
WASHINGTON.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
FLORIDA'S NORMALLY BUSTLING FORT
LAUDERDALE INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT
REOPENED TODAY, 16 HOURS AFTER
A MASS SHOOTING ALLEGEDLY
CARRIED OUT BY A 26-YEAR-OLD
IRAQ WAR VETERAN CAUSED IT TO BE
SHUT DOWN.
THOUSANDS OF PASSENGERS WHO HAD
BEEN STRANDED AFTER FLIGHTS WERE
CANCELED WERE ABLE TO BOARD
FLIGHTS AGAIN.
THE ALLEGED SHOOTER, ESTEBAN
SANTIAGO, OPENED FIRE EARLY
YESTERDAY AFTERNOON WITH A SEMI-
AUTOMATIC HANDGUN INSIDE A
TERMINAL BAGGAGE CLAIM AREA
AFTER RETRIEVING THE GUN FROM
HIS LUGGAGE.
IN 70 TO 80 SECONDS, HE KILLED
FIVE PEOPLE AND WOUNDED SIX
OTHERS BEFORE POLICE ARRESTED
HIM.
VICTIMS FROM IOWA, VIRGINIA, AND
GEORGIA WERE IN TOWN ON
VACATION.
THREE OF THE WOUNDED WERE STILL
BEING TREATED IN A HOSPITAL
INTENSIVE CARE UNIT TODAY.
THE F.B.I. SAYS IT BELIEVES
SANTIAGO FLEW FROM HIS HOME IN
ANCHORAGE, ALASKA, TO FLORIDA TO
CARRY OUT THE ATTACK, BUT AGENTS
DON'T KNOW WHY.
>> WE HAVE NOT RULED OUT
ANYTHING.
WE CONTINUE TO LOOK AT ALL
AVENUES, AND ALL MOTIVES FOR
THIS HORRIFIC ATTACK.
>> Sreenivasan: SANTIAGO, WHO
WAS BORN IN NEW JERSEY AND GREW
UP IN PUERTO RICO, DEPLOYED IN
2010 FOR ONE YEAR IN IRAQ WITH
THE PUERTO RICAN NATIONAL GUARD.
THE PENTAGON SAYS HE WAS DEMOTED
AND DISCHARGED FROM THE ALASKA
NATIONAL GUARD LAST YEAR FOR
UNSATISFACTORY PERFORMANCE.
THE F.B.I. HAS INTERVIEWED HIS
FAMILY, WHO SAYS HE HAS A
HISTORY OF MENTAL ILLNESS AND
WAS ONCE COMMITTED TO A
PSYCHIATRIC HOSPITAL.
HIS BROTHER SAYS SANTIAGO HEARD
VOICES AND BELIEVED THE C.I.A.
CONTROLLED HIM THROUGH ONLINE
MESSAGES.
FLORIDA GOVERNOR RICK SCOTT MET
WITH TRAVELERS AT THE AIRPORT
TODAY.
>> WHEN YOU HURT ONE OF US, YOU
HURT ALL OF US.
>> Sreenivasan: SANTIAGO IS
EXPECTED TO MAKE HIS FIRST COURT
APPEARANCE ON FEDERAL MURDER
CHARGES ON MONDAY.
PRESIDENT-ELECT DONALD TRUMP
TODAY FORMALLY NOMINATED FORMER
INDIANA SENATOR DAN COATS TO BE
THE NEXT DIRECTOR OF NATIONAL
INTELLIGENCE.
COATS JUST FINISHED HIS THIRD
TERM IN THE SENATE AND
PREVIOUSLY SERVED IN THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, AS
AMBASSADOR TO GERMANY, AND WAS
IN THE ARMY.
THE D.N.I. COORDINATES THE
EFFORTS OF 16 U.S. INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES, INCLUDING THE C.I.A.,
THE F.B.I., THE NATIONAL
SECURITY AGENCY, AND MILITARY
INTELLIGENCE OPERATIONS.
AS FOR MR. TRUMP'S OTHER
APPOINTMENTS, THE U.S. SENATE
HAS SCHEDULED ITS FIRST
CONFIRMATION HEARINGS FOR
CABINET-LEVEL PICKS NEXT WEEK.
BUT ACCORDING TO THE OFFICE OF
GOVERNMENT ETHICS, SEVERAL PICKS
HAVE NOT SUBMITTED ALL THE
INFORMATION REQUIRED TO CHECK
POSSIBLE CONFLICTS OF INTEREST.
IN A LETTER TO SENATE LEADERS,
OFFICE DIRECTOR WALTER SHAUB
SAYS HE "HAS NOT RECEIVED EVEN
INITIAL DRAFT FINANCIAL
DISCLOSURE REPORTS FOR SOME OF
THE NOMINEES SCHEDULED FOR
HEARINGS."
SHAUB DID NOT IDENTIFY ANY
NOMINEES.
DEMOCRATIC MINORITY LEADER CHUCK
SCHUMER SAID TODAY, THE LETTER
"MAKES CRYSTAL CLEAR THAT THE
TRANSITION TEAM'S COLLUSION WITH
SENATE REPUBLICANS TO JAM
THROUGH THESE CABINET NOMINEES
BEFORE THEY'VE BEEN THOROUGHLY
VETTED IS UNPRECEDENTED."
IN RESPONSE, A TRUMP SPOKESWOMAN
TELLS THE NEWSHOUR IN PART:
"IT'S DISAPPOINTING SOME HAVE
CHOSEN TO POLITICIZE THE PROCESS
IN ORDER TO DISTRACT FROM
IMPORTANT ISSUES FACING OUR
COUNTRY.
THIS IS A DISSERVICE TO THE
COUNTRY."
ONE DAY AFTER TOP U.S.
INTELLIGENCE OFFICIALS SHOWED
HIM THE CLASSIFIED EVIDENCE THAT
RUSSIAN PRESIDENT VLADIMIR PUTIN
ORDERED A HACKING CAMPAIGN TO
INFLUENCE THE ELECTION IN HIS
FAVOR, PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP
SAID RUSSIA COULD BECOME AN ALLY
DURING HIS ADMINISTRATION.
IN A SERIES OF TWEETS THIS
MORNING, MR. TRUMP SAID IN PART:
"WHEN I AM PRESIDENT, RUSSIA
WILL RESPECT US FAR MORE THAN
THEY DO NOW, AND.... BOTH
COUNTRIES WILL, PERHAPS, WORK
TOGETHER TO SOLVE SOME OF THE
MANY GREAT AND PRESSING PROBLEMS
AND ISSUES OF THE WORLD!"
THE AGENCIES ALSO RELEASED A
DECLASSIFIED VERSION OF THEIR
KEY FINDINGS FOR PUBLIC
CONSUMPTION.
FOR MORE ON THE INTELLIGENCE
REPORT AND WHAT IT MEANS GOING
FORWARD, I AM JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY "WALL STREET
JOURNAL" REPORTER SHANE HARRIS.
SHANE, SO WHAT HAPPENS?
NOW WE'VE HAD THE CLASSIFIED
VERSION IN BOTH PARTIES' HANDS,
SO TO SPEAK, BOTH
ADMINISTRATIONS, THE INCOMING
ONE AND THE EXISTING ONE.
WHAT HAPPENS FOR CONGRESS?
>> WELL, THE MOST IMMEDIATE NEXT
STEP WILL BE THAT ON TUESDAY,
THE SENATE INTELLIGENCE
COMMITTEE IS GOING TO HOLD A
HEARING ABOUT THIS REPORT THAT'S
BEEN RELEASED PUBLICLY.
AND, OF COURSE, SOME OF ITS
MEMBERS HAVE ALREADY SEEN THE
CLASSIFIED VERSION, WHICH IS
ABOUT 50 PAGES WE'RE TOLD.
IT'S A LITTLE BIT LONGER THAN
WHAT THE PUBLIC HAS SEEN.
THERE WILL BE WITNESSES THERE.
THEY'LL BE ABLE TO QUESTION THE
INTELLIGENCE ABOUT THE FINDINGS
AND GO INTO MORE DETAILS ABOUT
WHY THEY REACHED THESE
CONCLUSIONS.
THAT WILL BE ANOTHER OPPORTUNITY
FOR THIS TO GET AIRED PUBLICLY
AND FOR LAWMAKERS TO ASK MORE
DIRECT QUESTIONS ABOUT THESE
FINDINGS THAT THE RUSSIAN
GOVERNMENT INTERVENED IN THE
ELECTION AND TRIED TO HELP
DONALD TRUMP GET ELECTED.
>> Sreenivasan: IN THE
NON-CLASSIFIED VERSION, THERE'S
NO SMOKING GUN, SO TO SPEAK, BUT
YOU SORT OF EXPECT THAT BECAUSE
OF THE SOURCES AND METHODS ON
HOW THEY GOT THE INFORMATION
THAT'S IN THE CLASSIFIED REPORT.
IS THAT WHAT THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES ARE
TELLING YOU?
>> EXACTLY.
THIS IS NOT AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
THEM TO SO MUCH SHOW THEIR WORK
AS TO SHOW THEIR CONCLUSIONS.
SO I THINK THE PEOPLE WHO WERE
ALREADY SKEPTICAL ABOUT THESE
FINDINGS ARE PROBABLY NOT GOING
TO BE PERSUADED BY THIS
PARTICULAR DOCUMENT THAT WAS
RELEASED.
ALTHOUGH IT IS DEFINITIVE IN A
LOT OF ITS JUDGMENTS, IT DOESN'T
ACTUALLY TELL YOU, "WE GOT THIS
INFORMATION FROM, FOR INSTANCE,
THIS PERSON IN RUSSIA OR THIS
SERIES OF COMMUNICATIONS THAT WE
INTERCEPTED."
THAT'S BEEN LEFT OUT, AS HAVE A
NUMBER OF OTHER PIECES OF THE
PUZZLE, IF YOU WILL, THAT THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES FEEL WOULD
BE TOO REVEALING ABOUT HOW THEY
COLLECT INFORMATION, AND THEY
DON'T WANT TO BURN THOSE
CHANNELS GOING FORWARD.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU KNOW,
THERE'S ONE QUOTE THAT I'M
LOOKING AT THAT SAYS, "WE DID
NOT MAKE AN ASSESSMENT OF THE
IMPACT THAT RUSSIAN ACTIVITIES
HAD ON THE OUTCOME OF THE 2016
ELECTION."
THAT'S FROM THE REPORT.
AND THEN I'M LOOKING AT
PRESIDENT-ELECT TRUMP'S TWEET,
"INTELLIGENCE STATED VERY
STRONGLY THERE WAS ABSOLUTELY NO
EVIDENCE THAT HACKING
AFFECTED THE ELECTION RESULTS."
I MEAN, CAN BOTH OF THOSE EXIST
IN SORT OF PARALLEL UNIVERSES
HERE?
>> WELL, I THINK THEY DO.
I MEAN, CLEARLY, THE
INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES DID NOT
TRY TO MAKE THAT ASSESSMENT OF
WHETHER OR NOT THIS RUSSIAN
INTERVENTION, WHICH THEY THINK
WAS TRYING TO HELP MR. TRUMP GET
ELECTED, WHETHER IT ACTUALLY
SUCCEEDED.
AND IN HIS STATEMENT, HE'S
CHARACTERIZING A BIT TOO FAR
WHAT THE INTELLIGENCE AGENCIES
ACTUALLY SAID.
NOW, WHAT THEY DID SAY IN THIS
REPORT IS THAT THERE IS NO
EVIDENCE THAT RUSSIAN HACKERS OR
ANYONE ELSE ACTUALLY MANIPULATED
VOTE COUNTS OR GOT INTO VOTING
MACHINES OR EQUIPMENT AND
LITERALLY CHANGED THE OUTCOME
THAT WAY.
BUT THIS QUESTION OF WHETHER
THIS SO-CALLED INFLUENCE
CAMPAIGN CHANGED THE OUTCOME OF
THE ELECTION, THEY DID NOT
ASSESS THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THAT THE
VOTING MACHINES WERE NOT HACKED
WAS SOMETHING EVEN THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION MENTIONED.
THE OTHER THING IS THAT THIS
REPORT SEEMS TO BE A GUIDE POST
FOR ELECTIONS TO COME AROUND THE
WORLD.
>> THAT'S RIGHT.
AND THE INTELLIGENCE REPORT AND
OFFICIALS PUBLICLY HAVE SAID
THEY WANT TO MAKE CLEAR THIS IS
NOT ACTIVITY BY RUSSIA THAT THEY
IMAGINE WILL BE LIMITED ONLY TO
THIS CAMPAIGN, THIS ELECTION.
THEY'RE ALREADY SEEING SIMILAR
ACTIVITIES IN ENGLAND, IN
GERMANY.
THEY HAVE SEEN THEM BEFORE IN
EASTERN EUROPE.
AND THEY REALLY WANTED PEOPLE TO
UNDERSTAND, THIS IS NOW A FULL
SPECTRUM OF OPERATIONS THAT THE
RUSSIAN GOVERNMENT IS USING AND
I THINK NOW HAS SOME EVIDENCE
THAT IT CAN BE VERY EFFECTIVE.
AND THAT THE INTELLIGENCE
OFFICIALS JUST DON'T EXPECT THAT
THEY'RE GOING TO STOP.
THIS IS A... KIND OF A NEW
REALITY, A NEW WEAPON, FRANKLY,
THAT THEY THINK THAT THE
RUSSIANS ARE GOING TO BE USING.
>> Sreenivasan, YOU KNOW, WHAT
ABOUT THE CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE
HAVE, LISTEN, WE AREN'T POINTING
THE FINGER AT RUSSIA, BUT THE
UNITED STATES AND OTHER WESTERN
COUNTRIES PROBABLY HAVE SIMILAR
OPERATIONS UNDER WAY AROUND THE
WORLD?
>> IT'S A VERY INTERESTING
QUESTION.
SORT OF AREN'T WE DOING THE SAME
THING OVERSEAS PERHAPS THAT
THEY'RE DOING TO US?
AND JAMES CLAPPER, THE DIRECTOR
OF NATIONAL INTELLIGENCE,
TESTIFIED THIS WEEK AND WAS
SORT OF ASKED ABOUT THIS POINT.
AND HE REALLY DREW A LINE BY
SAYING, LOOK, INTELLIGENCE
AGENCIES ALL AROUND THE WORLD,
INCLUDING OURS, COLLECT
INFORMATION ALL THE TIME,
INCLUDING ABOUT THEIR POLITICAL
ADVERSARIES.
THE DISTINCTION HE WAS MAKING,
THOUGH, THAT RUSSIA DID HERE WAS
DISCLOSE THIS INFORMATION AND AS
SOME LAWMAKERS SAID, WEAPONIZE
IT.
IT'S THAT THE DISCLOSURE, THE
GIVING OF THE EMAILS TO
WIKILEAKS AND OTHER GROUPS, THAT
THEY FEEL CROSSED THE LINE.
>> Sreenivasan: ALREADY, SHANE
HARRIS, SENIOR NATIONAL SECURITY
REPORTER FROM THE "WALL STREET
JOURNAL," THANKS SO MUCH.
>> PLEASURE, THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: CALIFORNIA'S
STATE INSURANCE COMMISSIONER
SAYS A FOREIGN GOVERNMENT MAY
HAVE BEEN BEHIND A HACK OF
AMERICA'S SECOND LARGEST HEALTH
INSURER.
THE REPORT RELEASED YESTERDAY
DID NOT IDENTIFY WHO WAS
ALLEGEDLY BEHIND THE 2014 HACK
OF 78 MILLION CUSTOMER ACCOUNTS
AT ANTHEM.
BUT THE REPORT SAYS THE CYBER-
SECURITY FIRM HIRED TO CONDUCT
THE INVESTIGATION BELIEVES WITH
"MEDIUM CONFIDENCE" A FOREIGN
GOVERNMENT ORDERED THE THEFT OF
SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBERS,
BIRTHDATES, AND EMPLOYMENT
DETAILS.
ANTHEM HAS AGREED TO
$260 MILLION IN SECURITY
UPGRADES AS PART OF A SETTLEMENT
WITH INSURANCE REGULATORS.
MEET THE NATIVE AMERICAN ARTIST
WHO CREATED A PHOTO SERIES TO
BRING GREATER VISIBILITY TO HER
TRIBE.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: CANDIDATE DONALD
TRUMP PROMISED TO REPEAL
PRESIDENT OBAMA'S AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT, ALSO KNOWN AS
OBAMACARE, AND THE NEW
REPUBLICAN MAJORITIES IN
CONGRESS SHARE THAT AGENDA,
THOUGH THEY HAVEN'T PROPOSED A
SPECIFIC PROGRAM TO REPLACE IT.
HOWEVER, THIS PROCESS IS ALREADY
UNDER WAY IN KENTUCKY, THE HOME
STATE OF SENATE MAJORITY LEADER
MITCH McCONNELL.
THE STATE HAS HAD ONE OF THE
HIGHEST RATES OF OBAMACARE
ENROLLMENT, MAINLY DUE TO ITS
MEDICAID EXPANSION.
IN FACT, TWO-THIRDS OF AMERICANS
WHO HAVE OBTAINED HEALTH
INSURANCE UNDER OBAMACARE WERE
POOR ENOUGH TO QUALIFY THROUGH
MEDICAID.
BUT TWO YEARS AGO, KENTUCKY
ELECTED A REPUBLICAN GOVERNOR
WHO PROMISED TO ROLL IT BACK.
IN TONIGHT'S SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND SPECIAL
CORRESPONDENT CHRIS BURY REPORTS
HOW THAT'S PLAYING OUT.
THIS REPORT IS PART OF THE
NEWSHOUR'S ONGOING LOOK AT THE
44th PRESIDENT'S LEGACY, "THE
OBAMA YEARS."
>> WE'RE USED TO IT NOW.
>> Reporter: FOR STEVE AND
MELONIE OCHSNER, THE AFFORDABLE
CARE ACT HAS MEANT LIFE-SAVING
HEALTH CARE WITHOUT GOING BROKE.
STEVE, WHO IS 60, HAS THROAT
CANCER.
>> EVERY DAY WE LOOK LIKE WE
SEEM TO BE GETTING A LITTLE BIT
BETTER.
>> Reporter: HIS TREATMENTS,
INCLUDING CHEMOTHERAPY AND
RADIATION, ARE COVERED BY
MEDICAID, THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
HEALTH PROGRAM FOR LOW INCOME
AND DISABLED AMERICANS.
THE OCHSNERS QUALIFIED AFTER THE
ACT, KNOWN AS OBAMACARE, TOOK
EFFECT.
BUT THE CANCER, CHEMO, AND
RADIATION HAVE TAKEN THEIR TOLL,
LEAVING BURNS ON STEVE'S NECK
AND COSTING HIM HIS VOICE.
>> ARE THEY GIVING YOU A TOPICAL
STEROID FOR THAT?
>> NO, I'VE BEEN USING COCOA
BUTTER.
>> Reporter: MELONIE SPEAKS FOR
BOTH OF THEM.
WHAT HAS HAVING THIS INSURANCE
MEANT FOR STEVE'S HEALTH?
>> WITH THE MEDICAID, WE'VE PAID
NOTHING.
IT HAS COVERED EVERY OUNCE OF
IT.
SO, I MEAN, PEACE OF MIND HAS
JUST BEEN JUST ABSOLUTELY
TREMENDOUS.
>> Reporter: THE OCHSNERS, WHO
TAKE CARE OF THEIR THREE-YEAR-
OLD GRANDDAUGHTER, NOW GET
HEALTH INSURANCE BECAUSE
KENTUCKY, LIKE 31 OTHER STATES,
AGREED TO EXPAND MEDICAID UNDER
OBAMACARE.
BEFORE QUALIFYING FOR MEDICAID,
STEVE RELIED ON PRIVATE
INSURANCE FROM THE COMPANY THAT
OWNED THE GAS STATION WHERE HE
WORKED, WHICH MELONIE SAYS PAID
A MAXIMUM OF ONLY $2,000 A YEAR
IN BENEFITS.
>> I'M GOING TO PUT A NOTE IN
FOR THE BILLING DEPARTMENT.
>> Reporter: AFTER STEVE WAS
DIAGNOSED WITH CANCER IN 2009,
HIS TREATMENTS RAN UP BILLS OF
MORE THAN $100,000 BEFORE THE
COUPLE QUALIFIED FOR MEDICAID IN
2014.
WOULD YOU BE DEEPLY IN DEBT IF
YOU DIDN'T HAVE THIS INSURANCE?
>> WE ARE DEEPLY IN DEBT FROM
NOT HAVING IT BEFORE, YEAH, AND
WE WOULD BE EVEN MORE DEEPLY IN
DEBT.
YEAH, SELLING THIS HOUSE
WOULDN'T GET US OUT FROM UNDER
IT.
>> Reporter: UNDER THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT, KENTUCKY,
LIKE 17 OTHER STATES AND
WASHINGTON D.C., SET UP ITS OWN
HEALTH INSURANCE EXCHANGE.
KENTUCKY CALLED THEIRS "KYNECT."
RESIDENTS COULD SIGN UP FOR
PRIVATE INSURANCE, OFTEN WITH
GOVERNMENT SUBSIDIES.
YET FOR EVERY KENTUCKY RESIDENT
WHO OBTAINED PRIVATE INSURANCE
THIS WAY, ANOTHER FOUR RESIDENTS
OBTAINED COVERAGE THROUGH
MEDICAID EXPANSION.
THE EXPANSION RAISED THE INCOME
ELIGIBILITY TO 138% OF THE
FEDERAL POVERTY LINE-- THAT'S
ABOUT $16,000 A YEAR FOR AN
INDIVIDUAL AND $33,000 FOR A
FAMILY OF FOUR.
HERE IN KENTUCKY, THE ROLLOUT OF
THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT IN 2013
WAS CONSIDERED SUCH A SUCCESS,
IT BECAME A MODEL FOR OTHER
STATES.
IN THE FIRST FEW MONTHS, MORE
THAN 300,000 PEOPLE QUALIFIED
FOR MEDICAID COVERAGE UNDER THE
NEW LAW, AND KENTUCKY SAW A
DRAMATIC DECREASE IN THE
PERCENTAGE OF UNINSURED
RESIDENTS-- ONE OF THE BIGGEST
DROPS OF ITS KIND IN THE
COUNTRY.
IN 2013, NEARLY 19% OF
KENTUCKY'S NON-ELDERLY
POPULATION HAD NO HEALTH
INSURANCE.
BY 2015, THE UNINSURED RATE HAD
FALLEN TO LESS THAN 7%.
THAT'S BETTER THAT THE NATIONAL
RATE OF THE UNINSURED, WHICH HAS
DROPPED TO 10.5%.
FORMER KENTUCKY GOVERNOR STEVE
BESHEAR, A DEMOCRAT, PUSHED FOR
BOTH A STATE EXCHANGE AND
MEDICAID EXPANSION UNDER THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT.
>> I DIDN'T CARE WHO PASSED IT.
I DIDN'T CARE IF IT WAS A
DEMOCRAT OR A REPUBLICAN, IN
TERMS OF POLITICS.
I MEAN, IT WAS THE ONE
OPPORTUNITY THAT I FELT LIKE WE
HAD TO MAKE A BIG DIFFERENCE IN
KENTUCKY IN THE NEXT GENERATION
OR SO IN OUR HEALTH.
>> Reporter: THAT DIFFERENCE IS
SEEN IN A STUDY PUBLISHED BY THE
"JOURNAL OF THE AMERICAN MEDICAL
ASSOCIATION" LAST OCTOBER.
IT FOUND KENTUCKIANS NEWLY
INSURED IN THE FIRST TWO YEARS
OF MEDICAID EXPANSION RECEIVED
MORE PRIMARY AND PREVENTIVE
CARE, MADE FEWER EMERGENCY ROOM
VISITS, AND REPORTED BETTER
HEALTH.
BUT IN KENTUCKY, LIKE MANY
STATES THAT USUALLY VOTE
REPUBLICAN FOR PRESIDENT,
OBAMACARE BECAME A POLITICAL
PUNCHING BAG.
AND IN 2015, REPUBLICAN MATT
BEVIN SUCCESSFULLY RAN FOR
GOVERNOR, PROMISING TO ROLL BACK
PARTS OF THE LAW IF ELECTED.
LAST YEAR, KENTUCKY ELIMINATED
ITS STATE EXCHANGE, SAYING IT
WAS REDUNDANT GIVEN THE FEDERAL
EXCHANGE.
TO HELP CONTROL COSTS, GOVERNOR
BEVIN ALSO ASKED THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT FOR PERMISSION--
KNOWN AS A WAIVER-- TO OVERHAUL
THE STATE'S MEDICAID PROGRAM,
WHICH NOW COVERS 1.3 MILLION
PEOPLE, ALMOST ONE IN THREE
RESIDENTS.
>> I WANT TO SEE US TO BECOME A
HEALTHIER STATE.
I DON'T WANT US TO SIMPLY TO
PROVIDE PEOPLE WITH A MEDICAID
CARD AND FEEL LIKE WE'VE DONE
OUR PART.
WE OWE PEOPLE BETTER THAN THAT.
>> Reporter: THE GOVERNOR
DECLINED OUR INTERVIEW REQUEST,
BUT REPUBLICAN STATE
REPRESENTATIVE ADDIA WUCHNER,
WHO CHAIRS THE STATE COMMITTEE
ON HEALTH AND FAMILY SERVICES,
SUPPORTS HIS PLAN.
>> THE GOAL IS TO HELP EVERY
INDIVIDUAL THAT IS BEING SERVED
BY TRADITIONAL MEDICAID, OR
EXPANDED MEDICAID, OR MOVING
INTO THE EXCHANGE, TO LEARN TO
UTILIZE THE TOOLS OF HAVING
INSURANCE AND COVERAGE.
>> Reporter: ARE YOU SAYING IT
PROVIDES AN INCENTIVE?
>> SO IT ALLOWS THEM TO HAVE
THAT SKIN IN THE GAME, TO BE
CONSUMERS, BUT ALSO TAKING THAT
RESPONSIBILITY.
>> Reporter: UNDER BEVIN'S PLAN,
MEDICAID WOULD NO LONGER BE
FREE.
RECIPIENTS WOULD BE CHARGED
MONTHLY PREMIUMS UP TO $15 A
MONTH, OR $180 A YEAR.
ABLE-BODIED RECIPIENTS WITHOUT
DEPENDENTS WOULD BE REQUIRED TO
WORK OR VOLUNTEER UP TO 20 HOURS
A WEEK OR TO BE ENROLLED IN
SCHOOL.
THOSE ELIGIBLE FOR EXPANDED
MEDICAID WHO MISS A SINGLE
PREMIUM PAYMENT COULD LOSE
COVERAGE FOR AT LEAST SIX
MONTHS.
>> $180 A YEAR TO HAVE THIS...
ALMOST THE SAME COVERAGE THAT
YOU AND I WOULD HAVE.
THAT'S A PRETTY GOOD DEAL.
SO, THE GOVERNOR'S NOT ASKING,
NOR ARE WE, ASKING TOO MUCH OF
THEM.
BUT WE'RE ASKING THEM TO BE
COLLABORATORS IN THEIR
COVERAGE OF CARE.
>> Reporter: THE CONSEQUENCE IS,
YOU CAN LOSE YOUR INSURANCE IF
YOU DON'T MEET THESE
OBLIGATIONS?
>> IF YOU DON'T STEP UP AND BE
RESPONSIBLE.
WE WANT TO-- BUT WE'RE GOING TO
PUT ALL THE TOOLS IN PLACE TO
HELP CITIZENS BE RESPONSIBLE.
JUST GIVING THEM HEALTH
INSURANCE, JUST GIVING-- PEOPLE,
OFTEN, COVERAGE DOESN'T MEAN
THAT THEY'RE REALLY ENGAGED IN
THE CARE THAT THEY HAVE.
>> Reporter: WUCHNER SAYS
KENTUCKY NEEDS THE WAIVER,
BECAUSE THE AFFORDABLE CARE ACT
REQUIRES STATES TO PAY A GROWING
SHARE OF MEDICAID EXPANSION
COSTS: 5% THIS YEAR, RISING TO
10% BY 2020, COSTING THE STATE
AN ESTIMATED $1.2 BILLION
BETWEEN 2017 AND 2021, AND
MAKING MEDICAID THE LARGEST
PIECE OF THE STATE BUDGET PIE
AFTER EDUCATION.
>> 5% DOESN'T SOUND LIKE A LOT,
BUT IT ADDS UP TO BE A LOT OF
MONEY.
SO, I THINK THE GOVERNOR'S
APPROACH TO LOOK AT IT IS STILL
WANTING TO ASSURE PEOPLE HAVE
CARE, BUT, ACTUALLY, WE HAVE A
SHARED RESPONSIBILITY IN THAT
CARE.
>> Reporter: FORMER GOVERNOR
BESHEAR SEES ANOTHER MOTIVE AT
WORK.
>> MY BIGGEST CONCERN IS THAT
THE EFFORTS TO GET A WAIVER ARE
REALLY JUST DISGUISE FOR, "WE'D
LIKE TO KICK AS MANY PEOPLE OFF
THIS PROGRAM AS WE CAN."
>> Reporter: THE CURRENT
GOVERNMENT SAYS THAT KENTUCKY
CANNOT AFFORD THIS EXPANSION OF
MEDICAID.
>> YES.
AND IT'S SIMPLY NOT TRUE.
>> Reporter: BESHEAR ARGUES THAT
HEALTHCARE SPENDING DUE TO THE
MEDICAID EXPANSION PROVIDES AN
ECONOMIC BOOST AND THOUSANDS OF
HEALTH CARE JOBS FOR THE STATE.
>> IT IS SUSTAINABLE AND IT'S
AFFORDABLE.
BUT, YOU KNOW, WHEN YOU GET INTO
IDEOLOGY, WHICH THIS CURRENT
ADMINISTRATION IS IN-- AND
THEY'RE NOT THE ONLY ONES.
I MEAN, THIS IS RAMPANT AROUND
THE COUNTRY, IT'S SORT OF,
"DON'T LET THE FACTS GET IN YOUR
WAY."
>> Reporter: AT THE SHAWNEE
CHRISTIAN HEALTHCARE CENTER IN
LOUISVILLE, WHICH SERVES ONE OF
THE CITY'S POORER NEIGHBORHOODS,
OUTREACH DIRECTOR ANNE PEAK
FEARS A RETURN TO THE DAYS WHEN
NEARLY ONE-IN-FIVE KENTUCKIANS
WERE UNINSURED.
>> WE WILL LOSE HUNDREDS OF
THOUSANDS OF FOLKS' COVERAGE,
PEOPLE WILL NOT BE ABLE TO GET
THE PREVENTIVE CARE THAT THEY
NEED AND PEOPLE WILL BE GOING
BACK TO THE EMERGENCY ROOMS IN
DROVES.
>> I'VE BEEN COUGHING A WHOLE
WHOLE LOT.
>> Reporter: ROBIN DUNCAN NOW
GETS REGULAR CHECKUPS AT THE
SHAWNEE CLINIC, BECAUSE SHE IS
COVERED BY MEDICAID.
BUT LAST APRIL, BEFORE SHE HAD
MEDICAID, ROBIN SHOWED UP AT THE
E.R. UNINSURED AND HAD TO
UNDERGO GALLBLADDER SURGERY.
BEFORE YOU HAD INSURANCE, HOW
MUCH DID YOU RELY ON THE
EMERGENCY ROOM?
>> I WAS PROBABLY HAVING TO GO
THERE FOR A LITTLE WHILE.
I WAS PROBABLY HAVING TO GO,
LIKE, TWO OR THREE TIMES, LIKE,
A MONTH.
>> Reporter: FOR YOUR BASIC
HEALTH CARE.
>> CORRECT, YES.
>> Reporter: AFTER THE MEDICAID
EXPANSION, KENTUCKY HOSPITALS
SAVED MORE THAN $1 BILLION IN
UNCOMPENSATED OR CHARITY CARE
FROM 2013 TO 2014, ACCORDING TO
A STATE-COMMISSIONED STUDY.
KENTUCKY'S WAIVER, IF APPROVED
BY THE TRUMP ADMINISTRATION,
COULD PROVIDE A GLIMPSE OF WHAT
A REPUBLICAN REPLACEMENT FOR
OBAMACARE MIGHT LOOK LIKE.
BRIAN BLASE, A FORMER STAFFER
FOR CONGRESSIONAL REPUBLICANS,
NOW WORKS AS A HEALTH POLICY
ANALYST.
>> WE HAVE 50 STATES.
THEY'RE OFTEN REFERRED TO AS
LABORATORIES OF DEMOCRACY.
LET THEM FIGURE OUT SOME OF
THESE PROBLEMS, AND LEARN FROM
EACH OTHER.
>> Reporter: BLASE FAVORS A
REPEAL OF THE MEDICAID
EXPANSION AND SAYS THAT IN
STATES LIKE KENTUCKY, THE
INVESTMENT HAS NOT PAID OFF.
>> RIGHT NOW, WHEN STATES SPEND
AN EXTRA DOLLAR, THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT IS REIMBURSING THE
STATE FOR MOST OF THAT DOLLAR.
I WANT TO SEE A CHANGE WHERE
STATES GET A SET AMOUNT OF
MONEY WITH A LOT MORE FREEDOM
WITH HOW TO MANAGE THE DOLLARS,
AND WHO TO GEAR THE PROGRAM TO.
I THINK WE HAVE PROBABLY WAY TOO
MANY PEOPLE ON THE MEDICAID
PROGRAM, AND THAT IT'S NOT ABLE
TO SERVE SORT OF THE TRULY
NEEDY WHO NEED THE PUBLIC
ASSISTANCE.
>> Reporter: ABOUT 20 MILLION
AMERICANS HAVE HEALTH INSURANCE
THAT DIDN'T HAVE HEALTH
INSURANCE BEFORE.
ISN'T THAT A GOOD THING?
>> IT'S A GOOD THING, IF YOU
DON'T LOOK AT WHAT THE
CORRESPONDING COSTS ARE, RIGHT?
YOU HAVE TO THINK, WHAT'S THE
VALUE THAT PEOPLE ARE GETTING ON
THIS HEALTH INSURANCE?
AND IS THE VALUE THAT PEOPLE ARE
GETTING WORTH THE COSTS?
>> Reporter: BLASE CITES A 2013
STUDY FROM OREGON THAT FOUND
PEOPLE WHO GOT COVERAGE THROUGH
A MEDICAID EXPANSION DID UTILIZE
MORE HEALTH SERVICES, BUT SHOWED
NO SIGNIFICANT IMPROVEMENT IN
PHYSICAL MEASURES SUCH AS HIGH
BLOOD PRESSURE AND CHOLESTEROL
LEVELS, THOUGH DIABETES
DETECTION AND TREATMENT WENT UP.
BUT JONATHAN WEINER, A PROFESSOR
OF PUBLIC HEALTH AT JOHNS
HOPKINS UNIVERSITY, SAYS THERE
ARE DEFINITE HEALTH BENEFITS TO
HAVING COVERAGE.
>> FOR THE INDIVIDUAL,
UNQUESTIONABLY, PEOPLE WITH AN
INSURANCE CARD IN THEIR POCKET
ARE HEALTHIER AND OVER THE LONG
TERM HAVE A BETTER AND LONGER
LIFE THAN SOMEONE THAT DOESN'T
HAVE AN INSURANCE CARD.
>> Reporter: ONE OF THE REASONS
REPUBLICANS OPPOSED THIS
MEDICAID EXPANSION: THEY SAY
IT'S BEEN FAR TOO EXPENSIVE FOR
THE HEALTH OUTCOMES THAT HAVE
BEEN PRODUCED.
>> WELL, HEALTH CARE IS
EXPENSIVE.
PEOPLE IN PRIVATE INSURANCE
PLANS SPEND EVEN MORE THAN IS
THE CASE HERE.
BUT THIS WAY THEY CAN GET
PREVENTIVE CARE.
THEY CAN GET THEIR DIABETES
TREATED.
YES, THAT'S MORE EXPENSIVE-- BUT
THEY WILL BE HEALTHIER.
>> SAY "AHHHHH."
>> AHHHHH.
>> Reporter: STEVE OCHSNER AND
HIS WIFE, MELONIE, CREDIT THE
AFFORDABLE CARE ACT WITH HELPING
KEEP STEVE ALIVE DURING HIS
BATTLE WITH THROAT CANCER.
THEY'RE OPEN TO CHANGES IN THE
LAW, INCLUDING PAYING A PREMIUM
OR VOLUNTEERING TO KEEP THEIR
MEDICAID COVERAGE.
>> Reporter: YOU'D BE OKAY?
>> WE'D BE OKAY WITH IT.
AND I KNOW THAT THERE ARE A LOT
OF PEOPLE THAT WOULDN'T.
BUT WE'D BE OKAY WITH IT.
WE JUST WOULD.
>> Reporter: BECAUSE THE
INSURANCE IS THAT IMPORTANT.
>> BECAUSE THE INSURANCE IS THAT
IMPORTANT.
IT IS.
>>THIS IS PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND,
SATURDAY.
>> Sreenivasan: BRITISH
SCIENTISTS SAY A 100-MILE CRACK
IN ANTARCTICA WILL LIKELY LEAD
TO A 2,000 SQUARE MILE ICEBERG
BREAKING OFF THE CONTINENT IN
THE COMING WEEKS.
THAT'S LARGER THAN THE STATE OF
RHODE ISLAND.
ITN'S TOM CLARKE HAS MORE.
>> Reporter: IT'S A HUGE CRACK
RUNNING THROUGH THE EXPANSE OF
ICE ON THE EDGE OF WESTERN
ANTARCTICA.
THESE IMAGES TAKEN BY NASA SHOW
HOW LONG AND DEEP THE RIFT ON
THE LARSEN C ICE SHELF REALLY
IS.
IT THREATENS TO SEPARATE A CHUNK
OF ICE FROM THE ANTARCTIC
PENINSULA, AND SOON.
THE CRACK SPREAD TO HERE BY
2010.
SINCE THEN, IT HAS GRADUALLY
CREPT ALONG THE ICE.
BUT IN THE LAST MONTH, IT'S
LENGTHENED BY MORE THAN 11
MILES.
JUST 12 MILES OF ICE NOW KEEP IT
FROM FLOATING AWAY.
>> SO THE ICEBERG IS HANGING ON
BY A THIN STRIP OF ICE.
AND WE THINK THAT IN THE NEXT
FEW WEEKS, THAT IT MIGHT WELL
BREAK OFF.
>> Reporter: PROFESSOR DAVID
VAUGHN KNOWS ONLY TOO WELL WHAT
HAPPENS WHEN ICEBERGS BEGIN TO
BREAK OFF IN THE ANTARCTIC.
HE LEADS A TEAM OF SCIENTISTS
THAT HAVE BEEN MONITORING THE
PENINSULA FOR NEARLY THREE
DECADES.
>> IT'S ALREADY FLOATING, SO IT
HAS NO IMMEDIATE IMPACT ON SEA
LEVEL RISE.
BUT, IF, BECAUSE THE ICEBERG IS
TAKEN AWAY, THEN THE GLACIERS
THAT ARE FEEDING THAT ICE SHELF
SPEED UP.
THEN THAT WOULD BE AN EXTRA
CONTRIBUTION TO SEA LEVEL RISE.
>> Reporter: HE'S SEEN SEVERAL
SIMILAR BREAKOFFS, WHICH HAVE
CAUSED ICE TO DISINTEGRATE INTO
THE OCEAN, BUT NOTHING ON THIS
SCALE.
THE CRACK IN LARSEN C HAS BEEN
PRESENT FOR YEARS, AND IT'S
SUDDEN GROWTH IS THOUGHT TO BE
COMPLETELY INDEPENDENT OF
CLIMATE CHANGE IN THE ANTARCTIC.
BUT THERE IS EVIDENCE THAT THE
ICE SHEET HAS BEEN GETTING
THINNER, MELTING FROM BELOW AND
ABOVE DUE TO WARMER SEA AND AIR.
THAT COULD HAVE A BEARING ON
WHAT HAPPENS NEXT.
SOME SCIENTISTS PREDICT THE
ENTIRE ICE SHELF COULD COLLAPSE,
AS OTHERS HAVE DONE, SLOWLY RE-
DRAWING THE MAP OF ANTARCTICA.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY,
THOUSANDS OF SUPPORTERS OF
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA WAITED IN
A LINE STRETCHING FOR BLOCKS IN
CHICAGO TODAY TO GET FREE
TICKETS TO HIS FAREWELL ADDRESS.
THEY BRAVED TEMPERATURES AS LOW
AS 3 DEGREES TO SEE THE SPEECH
IN PERSON AT McCORMICK PLACE
CONVENTION CENTER ON TUESDAY
NIGHT.
MR. OBAMA'S ADDRESS TO THE
NATION AT THE END OF HIS SECOND
TERM WILL CONTINUE A TRADITION
STARTED BY GEORGE WASHINGTON IN
1796.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.